
# Product Driven Development  
  
When I became a software developer, the main tools I've been given to succeed in this profession were technical knowledge - be it of different development languages, of networks etc'... Once I was hired and started coding, I got exposed to the many different ideas, processes, methodologies, principals and patterns, we developers love so much to discuss. I learned about SOLID, DDD, agile, CI and CD, TDD, BDD and the list goes on. And my work as a software developer seemed to make more sense once I was equipped with all these wonderful tools that told me what was the best approach to code, how to make my code maintainable, how to get high quality code and overall how to do my job better. The main focus, obviously, was the code.  
  
Then some years after I got a job that changed the way I understood this profession. My boss back then took one day all of the "development team" into a meeting room and asked us "who thinks here they are a part of the development team? We all raised our hands. He then answered "well, you're all wrong. You are all a part of the product team". From then on it hit me that all this time I was going about it completely wrong.  
The way we do our job, the way we focus on our code as if it was our end goal, the way we follow new technologies as if this is what makes our industry run; somewhere we were missing the whole point of software development - all development, and no software. Where is the focus on the product we are supposed to develop?  
  
## Enter Product Driven Development  
  
It took some time and some new ideas and practices and some learning, for me to realise on what I need to focus and what is missing most in our profession. But before I go into that at length, let me make one thing clear.  
**This is no rupture, no x is dead rant, but as always, simply an evolution.**  
So most of the techniques, patterns, principals etc', I have mentioned above, are obviously valid. The question we need to ask ourselves continuously is what do they bring to the product? For example, when speaking of TDD and unit testing, [what is the "unit" that unit testing is referring to?](https://youtube.com/watch?v=EZ05e7EMOLM) Another example would be BDD's living documentation- a great idea, but if no one's going to refer back to the documentation you've been spending so much time on creating, then is it really worth it?  
A maybe more seemingly arguable example is that of the team who wanted to do DDD so bad, they just went ahead and done it - on their own, because no domain expert had the time for that, or even worse, because the team thought non developers won't get it, because it's all about architecture (or whatever they told themselves). While you may say 'well, that's not actually DDD' (and you'll be entirely right to say so), this is a symptom of the real problem I'm trying to address.  
**We, as software developers, have to push our workplaces towards a more collaborative way of developing a product. We have to own this.** This is not someone else's problem, it's our problem too.  
  
When was the last time you asked yourself "I'm continuously delivering new features - but are these actually the features we should be delivering?" We must push each other to become better at what we do.  
Yes, technologies allow us to find a more fitting solutions to some problems, but are we solving the right problems? I honestly believe that this approach is the most essential way to develop software. The rest is important, but not as this.  
  
## So what does PDD brings into the game?  
  
First of all, let me just say this- there's nothing new here. This is all a fait accompli for many of us and I'm just attempting to summarise and frame it nicely so I can hang it on a wall. Mainly because I believe this is the right way forward for businesses as well as for software engineers.  
So what am I referring to specifically? First of all the term is a lazy spin off of the term "Product Driven Organisations" that Melissa Perri coined (afaik) in her brilliant book [Escaping the Build Trap]([https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/escaping-the-build/9781491973783/)](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/escaping-the-build/9781491973783/)) and if you haven't read it yet, go read it now. Don't dilly-dally, stop what you're doing (ie reading my sloppy take on this issue) and go read that book. And if you don't have the time but would like to get a taste of it, you could [watch her talk about the topic]([https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DmJXpI7OJuY).](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DmJXpI7OJuY).)  
Perri talks in her book about the role of the product manager and how products and companies need strategies and a vision and how by breaking these into smaller goals that could bring the company closer to its vision. Teams can act up on these goals and should come up with different ways and ideas to explore what kind of features should they work on next. How we can apply different measurements and collect data that could give us more insight on what users actually need and what problems we can and should solve for our clients to make their lives easier and make our product better.  
Again, I'm not doing a great job here in summarising what she says and you really should go read the book, but what I'm trying to point out is that this is a collaborative job and we need to take part in this effort; we can bring in ideas and help studying our users to gain a better understanding of our clients and our product/s. This will make us the best software developers we could be. Needless to say, this would also help the business.  
  
How many times have you heard "developers" saying that's not their job? Or saying that it could never work here. Or that the business won't get it or that the boss doesn't think like that. The more we push towards this, the more we work closely together with the product managers or owners to bring this culture into our organisation, the more it will become the de facto way of doing things. This will cut down the waste we see on a daily basis. And on top of that, our jobs will become more interesting and fulfilling.  
DDD and SOA could be architectural processes that could help you here, if they're done right, but they could never be the answer on their own. [Impact mapping](https://www.impactmapping.org) or [Wardley Mapping](https://learnwardleymapping.com/) are great tools to introduce your organisation to this way of thinking, but they necessitate a cross organisational approach and cannot be taken upon by yourself only. However, these are tools to which you could expose your organisation. You will though need to find like minded people in your organisation with which you could combine your effort.

On the technical side of things, I believe developrs have also an extremely important reponsibility- keep things simple. Most of us aren't working for companies with the same problems as Google, Twitter, Amazon etc'; meaning, most of us don't need to overcomplicate things. In most cases, it feels like we tend to do so only to have a CV that reads better. Do we really need "microservices" everywhere ? If you're beginning to work on a new product you'll be better off with a simple monolith that you could grow and evolve along with the product much more easily. And if you model your domain correctly, you'd be able to move to service without too much pain if and when the time comes.  
Another great example is our obsession with CQRS/ES. In the city where I work, most posts I've seen demand a knowledge of Eent Sourcing, which is just absurd. [There is no reason why so many products need this technology](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-iuMjjKQnhg). Unless it was to cater for some CVs.  
Don't get me wrong though, ES could be a great tool, but as always, only for the right problem. I cannot stress how important it is for systems to be kept as simple as possible and open to extensions, so that the product could grow easily, and that your time would be directed mostly to product building rather than product support and maintenance.

## To sum it all up

PDD is a way of developing software within a "product driven organisation".  
It demands from you to:  

 1. Think about what kind of data can be crucial the organisation and whether you store it anywhere or not; discuss this with a project manager, work closely with them together on this, since the right data can help you address the real issues the organisation faces. If there's one thing you can do on your own to try and move things it's this.
 2. Work towards simplifying your system and code whenever possible, baring in mind your system should be open for extensions and closed for modifications- so that your product could grow _easily_ and will demand the least for maintenance and support purposes.
 3. Take part in an effort to move your organisation to become product driven.
 4. Get a better understanding of the strategy of the organisation and the goals you're trying to achieve.
 5. Challenge decisions taken by your colleagues on the direction of the product and the features you've been asked to deliver. Especially if no arguments have been provided as to why are we building what we're building.
 6. Re-contextualise the tools, technologies and processes your using, so that they are used to achieve a specific goal the company is aiming to achieve. For example, the DDD-crew has published a [starter modelling process](https://github.com/ddd-crew/ddd-starter-modelling-process) summary, containing different tools and best practices that could put you in the right direction, if you need more help. Another great source I could recommend is [Udi Dahan's Advanced Distributed Systems Design course](https://particular.net/adsd) that approaches the issue clearly from a product perspective.  

### Pull Requests
This is a work in progress. If you have anything to add or question or any constructive criticism to give, feel free to open an issue or a pull request.
